---
layout: post
title: Learning Graph Neural Networks - Day 1
date: 2024-7-9 00:01:00
description: Studied the Karate Club dataset and trained an embedding
tags: deep-learning gnn
categories: article
featured: false

giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
---

I recently started learning about Graph Neural Networks or more specifically Graph Representation Learning. After taking MA2054 - Graph Theory in semester 4, most of the content taught (traversal problems) pretty much bored me out. I found GNNs much more interesting in real-world applications. One such is drug discovery and molecule classification. 

I started off with [this playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLV8yxwGOxvvoNkzPfCx2i8an--Tkt7O8Z&si=OYRJpM9KMKws94kR). There is also a great free book named [Graph Representation Learning](https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~wlh/grl_book/files/GRL_Book.pdf) for beginners which covers from the basics of Graph Theory to advanced learning techniques.

Then I started exploring and experimenting with the Karate Club dataset. This was one of the first tutorials in the [PyTorch Geometric](https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/get_started/colabs.html) GNN library. One of the basic stuff to learn in GNNs is the Graph Convolution Network, which is the graph version of CNNs. Learning about the GCN layer, I read the paper [Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks
](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.02907) by Kipf et al. (2017). I tried to train a node embedding for the Karate Club network using a 3-layer GCN.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/node_embedding_init.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/node_embedding_trained.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Random initialization and trained node embedding
</div>

The process of training a simple GCN and watching the layers learn an embedding really excited me.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.liquid path="assets/video/training_gnn_embedding.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}
    </div>
</div>
